Nuclear Fuel Cycle Simulators
-----------------------------

A nuclear :term:`fuel cycle simulator` is a tool used to explore the impacts of
alternative nuclear fuel cycle choices when considered as a full system at a
national or international level.  Fundamentally, these simulators track the
flow of materials through the nuclear fuel cycle, accounting for processes
such as enrichment, transmutation, decay, and partition of isotopes.  From the
material flows and information about the operation history of the associated
facilities, various metrics can be assessed for different nuclear fuel cycle
designs.  As such, economic, environmental and security metrics resulting from
different fuel cycles can be compared to support decision making on research,
development and deployment decisions for future fuel cycle facilities.

Fuel cycle simulators provide insights into important trends as nuclear fuel
cycles undergo technological transitions in an uncertain socio-political
environment.  While it is important to achieve an overall conservation of
mass, there is typically a trade-off between the accuracy of specific isotopic
compositions and the speed of calculation. Given the inherent uncertainty of
making predictions in unknown socio-political futures, the physics models used
for each individual process in the fuel cycle are generally low-order
approximations based on a higher order analysis.

Fuel cycle simulators are not designed to provide detailed simulations
of specific facilities: neither high-fidelity predictive simulation nor
virtual reality environments.

History of Nuclear Fuel Cycle Simulators
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

A variety of simulators have been developed to study nuclear fuel cycles in
two categories.  One category models detailed facilities arranged in complex
coupling schemes that are validated with measurements from real systems.
While these tools offer a much more rigorous treatment of the physics, they
often require an experienced analyst to compute the results and may offer more
precision in the physics than is warranted given the socio-political
uncertainty.  The other category of tools is typically derived from simplified
systems models, with physics detail and complexity added where necessary to
improve the fidelity of results, but preferring rapid computation to
precision.

Regardless of the development path, these simulators have inherent
assumptions, limitations in their underlying software infrastructure, and
constraints on the variety of nuclear fuel cycle options that can be assessed.
Comparing the results from different tools, often in order to generate
confidence in them all, can be challenging and frequently requires
oversimplified problems that preclude the use of the advanced features of any
one tool.

There are a number of tools currently used around the world to support systems
decisions on nuclear fuel cycle options:

* VISION
* DANESS
* COSI
* NUWASTE
* CAFCA
* NFCSim
